README.md, before:

Synced with [upstream](https://github.com/chatmail/relay) as of commit [b000213c68bb91e80a217ea96c33033a373638d4](https://github.com/chatmail/relay/commit/b000213c68bb91e80a217ea96c33033a373638d4)

# Chatmail

This is a Chef cookbook for deploying [Chatmail](https://github.com/chatmail/relay). This is what I use to deploy my server. Check the `attributes/default.rb` to see which attributes you may need to set on your target node.

Everything is handled: Nginx, Postfix, the patched Dovecot, DKIM, log retention changes, the extra Chatmail related services (filtermail, etc). It's all here.

Future changes to Chatmail will need to be synced into this cookbook but it is only a minor inconvenience.

Patches welcome, of course.

## ACME Certs / Lego

The correct lego binary for your OS will be automatically downloaded from GitHub, verified by checksum, and installed to `/usr/bin/lego`. The version it uses by default is declared in the attributes file.

The drawback of the official Chatmail deployment is the expectation that you can do HTTP-01 validation on your server. This cookbook uses DNS-01 validation instead.

Background: my original deployment used a custom ACME plugin in Chef that I wrote for my preferred DNS provider, DNSimple. That's not suitable for others to use, so I rewrote that piece to use Lego. I was originally going to just use the packaged version of lego in Debian but discovered it's slightly too old and does not support DNSimple. So instead I'm just shipping a lego binary now.

## Using without a Chef Server

Can you use this without a Chef server? Yes! Here's how:

Install the Chef client. I prefer [CINC](https://cinc.sh), the community Chef fork:

```shell
# or go to their website and fetch the package / add their
# package repo if you don't want to curl | bash
curl https://omnitruck.cinc.sh/install.sh  | sudo bash
```

Make a directory structure compatible with a local chef deployment:

```
mkdir -p chef/cookbooks
cd chef
git clone https://github.com/feld/chatmail-cookbook cookbooks/chatmail
cp cookbooks/chatmail/attributes.json.example ./attributes.json
```

Edit the `attributes.json` file to suit your environment, including defining the ENVs you need for Lego.

Now you can run the following from inside this `chef/` directory:

```
sudo chef-client -z -o chatmail -j attributes.json
```

This should successfully deploy and configure Chatmail. The full list of DNS records you should deploy for proper federation will be found in `/tmp/chatmail.zone`.


## Divergences

The HTML templates have had a few tweaks. The QR code is generated with a different tool and doesn't embed the Deltachat logo. Otherwise it's mostly the same.

It does not validate DNS records, but it does print out a sample zone file which should be accurate for your deployment. This file can also be found at **/tmp/chatmail.zone** on the server.

### Debian

We still use cron to execute the housekeeping instead of a systemd timer as cron is cross-platform

### FreeBSD

We do not have journald to use as a circular buffer for memory-backed logging, so instead we enforce a strict newsyslog configuration to rotate logs and not keep archives based on the configured retention interval.

As we use ZFS on FreeBSD, we leverage ZFS instead of Dovecot to compress the mails. Also, you can define a quota for the ZFS dataset the mails are stored on to protect your server from running out of disk space from abuse of thestorage.

We require a custom package repo for a few packages that are not in the ports tree at this time: patched Dovecot, iroh-relay, chatmail-turn, and mtail. The chatmaild Python implementation may also be packaged in the future.

## Warranty

There is none. :)

Also storing your OAuth token or whatever for your DNS provider in the node attributes is not Best Practices^TM but it's not the end of the world.

## OS Support

* Debian 12 (bookworm) as we need Dovecot 2.3
* FreeBSD 14/15 (expects ZFS)

## Final notes

I didn't setup any Chef tests. If you would prefer to use Ansible this cookbook is probably an easier starting point as the steps and logic are a bit clearer. You'll have to convert the templates back to Jinja from ERB. Otherwise it should be very straightforward.


## Contact

You can join this [group chat](https://i.delta.chat/#6FE1642916908F1AC9CC7557CC99CF5DDB92043C&a=groupsbot%40testrun.org&g=chatmail%20cookbook%20support&x=Z1oIMyytnazhEY9iZaj2YV_0&i=hnaCYJj6VGMDRu7CHi29Nmaz&s=xDCT_RglgrKaGUJM6-adzZeG) to discuss the cookbook.

Commit message:

Remove ZFS requirement note in README, add some notes about maintenance

README.md, after:

Synced with [upstream](https://github.com/chatmail/relay) as of commit [b000213c68bb91e80a217ea96c33033a373638d4](https://github.com/chatmail/relay/commit/b000213c68bb91e80a217ea96c33033a373638d4)

# Chatmail

This is a Chef cookbook for deploying [Chatmail](https://github.com/chatmail/relay). This is what I use to deploy my server. Check the `attributes/default.rb` to see which attributes you may need to set on your target node.

Everything is handled: Nginx, Postfix, the patched Dovecot, DKIM, log retention changes, the extra Chatmail related services (filtermail, etc). It's all here.

Future changes to Chatmail will need to be synced into this cookbook but it is only a minor inconvenience.

Patches welcome, of course.

## ACME Certs / Lego

The correct lego binary for your OS will be automatically downloaded from GitHub, verified by checksum, and installed to `/usr/bin/lego`. The version it uses by default is declared in the attributes file.

The drawback of the official Chatmail deployment is the expectation that you can do HTTP-01 validation on your server. This cookbook uses DNS-01 validation instead.

Background: my original deployment used a custom ACME plugin in Chef that I wrote for my preferred DNS provider, DNSimple. That's not suitable for others to use, so I rewrote that piece to use Lego. I was originally going to just use the packaged version of lego in Debian but discovered it's slightly too old and does not support DNSimple. So instead I'm just shipping a lego binary now.

## Using without a Chef Server

Can you use this without a Chef server? Yes! Here's how:

Install the Chef client. I prefer [CINC](https://cinc.sh), the community Chef fork:

```shell
# or go to their website and fetch the package / add their
# package repo if you don't want to curl | bash
curl https://omnitruck.cinc.sh/install.sh  | sudo bash
```

Make a directory structure compatible with a local chef deployment:

```
mkdir -p chef/cookbooks
cd chef
git clone https://github.com/feld/chatmail-cookbook cookbooks/chatmail
cp cookbooks/chatmail/attributes.json.example ./attributes.json
```

Edit the `attributes.json` file to suit your environment, including defining the ENVs you need for Lego.

Now you can run the following from inside this `chef/` directory:

```
sudo chef-client -z -o chatmail -j attributes.json
```

This should successfully deploy and configure Chatmail. The full list of DNS records you should deploy for proper federation will be found in `/tmp/chatmail.zone`.


## Divergences

The HTML templates have had a few tweaks. The QR code is generated with a different tool and doesn't embed the Deltachat logo. Otherwise it's mostly the same.

It does not validate DNS records, but it does print out a sample zone file which should be accurate for your deployment. This file can also be found at **/tmp/chatmail.zone** on the server.

### Debian

We still use cron to execute the housekeeping instead of a systemd timer as cron is cross-platform

### FreeBSD

We do not have journald to use as a circular buffer for memory-backed logging, so instead we enforce a strict newsyslog configuration to rotate logs and not keep archives based on the configured retention interval.

If you use ZFS on FreeBSD and declare `['freebsd']['zfs']['enable'] = true', we leverage ZFS instead of Dovecot to compress the mails. Also, you can define a quota for the ZFS dataset the mails are stored on to protect your server from running out of disk space from abuse of thestorage.

We require a custom package repo for a few packages that are not in the ports tree at this time: patched Dovecot and Lua support enabled, iroh-relay, chatmail-turn, and mtail. The chatmaild Python services may also be packaged in the future.

## Warranty

There is none. :)

Also storing your OAuth token or whatever for your DNS provider in the node attributes is not Best Practices^TM but it's not the end of the world.

## OS Support

* Debian 12 (bookworm) as we need Dovecot 2.3
* FreeBSD 14/15

## Ongoing Maintenance

Currently it is up to you to update, harden, secure, firewall, etc your server as you see fit just like a normal relay deployed with the official `cmdeploy` tool. Additional functionality is being evaluated for inclusion in the Cookbook.

## Final notes

I didn't setup any Chef tests. If you would prefer to use Ansible this cookbook is probably an easier starting point as the steps and logic are a bit clearer. You'll have to convert the templates back to Jinja from ERB. Otherwise it should be very straightforward.


## Contact

You can join this [group chat](https://i.delta.chat/#6FE1642916908F1AC9CC7557CC99CF5DDB92043C&a=groupsbot%40testrun.org&g=chatmail%20cookbook%20support&x=Z1oIMyytnazhEY9iZaj2YV_0&i=hnaCYJj6VGMDRu7CHi29Nmaz&s=xDCT_RglgrKaGUJM6-adzZeG) to discuss the cookbook.
